Welcome to the chapter "Starter Kit":
Building Virtualized Development Environments using the tools Vagrant and Puppet.
The learning objectives of this chapter are:
Using ARSnova as an example, we want to introduce you to the complexities and management of modern web projects.
We will use ARSnova to explore and analyze the build process of such projects.
The ARSnova app is a good example of a client-server based web application:
It features a backend realized with Java Enterprise technology, and a REST API.
Based on this backend, several different HTML clients do their job.
During the units in this chapter you will experience how tedious it is to build a running system manually from the individual components.
To do this, we need virtual development environments.
However, we don't want to rebuild and provision these Virtual Machines (VMs) each time.
Instead, we want to create a configuration plan and use a software called Vagrant to create VMs based on Oracle's VirtualBox automatically.
It is important to understand that Development Environments need to be as close as possible to the production environment,
to avoid "migration hell" when migrating the individual components of different developers from their desktop environments into the production environment.
We need tools that automate system configuration.
At the end of this - difficult - chapter you will have the same development environment that is used for arsnova.eu.
You will have a Debian server OS with all the components of the backend, and the client software, locally on your machine.
Based on this environment, you will be prepared to explore the tools for performance tests, GUI tests, build automation etc. in the following chapters.
You will see that you can develop your applications with the tools of your choice on your host using the full performance capacities of your system
and that your development will be synchronized into the virtual machine of your production environment automatically.
You will then be able to test against this production environment and run the quality assessment processes.
At the end of the course, during the Scrum project, you will get a feel of what is called the DevOps rhythm: continuously coding, building, testing and deploying software.
All this happens in micro-cycles: editing a bit of code, running the quality "machinery" and checking the results in a pre-production environment.
Absolutely amazing.
At the end of the day we can deliver our daily work to our customers.
As you already know, we will use ARSnova as our teaching vehicle.
Let's have a look at the ARSnova project as seen from high above:
There is the mobile client which you have already used:
The mobile HTML5 client was developed using the Sencha Touch Application Framework.
The Sencha Touch build tools - Sencha Cmd - are used to produce the production version by minifying and optimizing the development version.
At the backend, there is a REST server.
It is built using the Java EE Spring framework,
Apache components like Apache Tomcat,
and for static pages the Apache HTTP server.
For real time operations, we use the WebSockets protocol and therefore we also need a Socket.IO server.
For a database, we use a NoSQL database, namely Apache CouchDB.
The complete backend system is built using Apache Maven and deployed using the Jenkins build environment.
There are two ways of building, installing and running ARSnova in a Virtual Machine:
The hard way as introduced in WE II, doing each step manually.
Since we want to develop apps and not work as main operations engineers,
we don't really need to know what happens in the background.
Therefore, of we could reduce the whole process of creating development and production environments,
and building the software from its components, to a single command, that would be truly amazing.
Let's get to the first homework assignment that will be the foundation for all other assignments:
It is your task to get the ARSnova project up and running in a development environment on your computer using the magic command
$ vagrant up.
Secondly, you are asked to get to know ARSnova from a user's perspective by studying the manual step by step.
To prove that you were successful and to enhance the learning effect, you are supposed to create eight questions using your new ARSnova installation.
Each question should use a different type of question, i.e. multiple choice, single choice, yes/no, free text, rating, grade, flash card and grid.
Content-wise, your questions should center on the first chapter, i.e. Build Automation:
- Vagrant: what is it and how to build virtual environments with a few lines of code
- Running automated configuration scripts with Puppet
For us as teachers this helps to get feedback if the materials we provided on Vagrant and Puppet were sufficient to get you going.
Please try to create exam-like questions and the corresponding answer options.
With the help of couchdb-python, you are asked to submit a dump (backup) of your local CouchDB containing the eight questions to the iversity platform for peer review,
The deadline for this submission is June 15th, 2014.
You and your peers will then have to review a minimum of 7 submissions (each containing 8 questions and the corresponding answers),
and evaluate the quality of those questions and answers.
Here is a short overview of the units of this chapter:
1. Optional crash courses and cheat sheets in case you are not familiar with Unix/Linux commands or our version management system Git.
2. Use cases of ARSnova and studying the ARSnova manual
3. Presentation of the system architecture and infrastructure of ARSnova
Please go through each of the sequences in detail and try to get a feeling for the complexity, the challenges and the requirements of maintaining of such a project.
4. Demonstration of how to install ARSnova the hard way (you don't have to follow that).
5. Introduction to the tools of this chapter: Vagrant and Puppet.
Easy creation of  Oracle Virtual Machines and system configuration scripts.
6. Installing ARSnova the soft way: Creating one or more Oracle Virtual Box(es) with the single command $ vagrant up.
i.e. create development and production environments that allow you to use shared folders for data exchange between your host and the VMs.
This allows you to develop your software using all the tools you are used to and without sacrificing performance.
Then, the homework assignment #0 as fundamental prerequisite for all the following chapters.
Finally, an ARSnova survey on your progress.
Good luck with the Starter Kit.